= Layout

== Layout

Layout is the process of determining the locations of figures in a
drawing. This two step process includes marking figures as invalid
(needing layout), and then validating the "branches" of figures that are
invalid. Multiple updates to a drawing can result in multiple figures
becoming invalid. To prevent intermediate states from being displayed to
the user, Draw2d provides a deferred update strategy which integrates
layout with native paint requests as well as figures requesting
repaints.  The result is that layouts occur all at once, after which the
results are painted.

Figure delegates the task of placing children to their `LayoutManager`.
This allows layouts to be swapped and is also just good separation of
concerns. Layouts cannot be shared because they may cache information
about their owner.

=== Validation

Validation is almost synonymous with layout. A figure that needs to
layout is marked as _invalid**.**_ All figures start in the invalid
state when constructed.  At some point later when `validate()` is
called, they mark themselves as valid and perform their layout. After
layout, the figure will then validate its children. Draw2d only uses
validate to perform layouts, but in theory it could be extended to
perform any sort of potentially expensive calculation that needs to be
integrated with the update manager.

=== Preferred Size

Most layouts need to query the children for their size constraints.
IFigure provides methods for querying the minimum, preferred, and
maximum sizes. A figure such as Label will have a preferred size based
on its text or icon being displayed. If a figure contains other figures,
then its preferred size will be based on how it would like to arrange
its children. In this case, the size requests are forwarded to the
layout manager.

Hints can be used when querying preferred and minimum size. For example,
if the amount of available width is known, this width can be passed to a
figure which may be wrapping a paragraph of text. The figure would then
return the height and width necessary to wrap the paragraph to the given
amount of space.

=== Changes that cause Layouts

When a figure is changed in a way that affects its preferred size or
layout, it calls `revalidate()`. Revalidation is the process of marking
yourself as invalid and requesting revalidate on your parent figure.
This process continues up the parent chain until the root figure (or
some validation root) adds itself to the update managers list of invalid
figures. At a later time, the update manager will go through its
collection of invalid figures and call validate() on them. In some
situations, invalid figures may be added or re-added during validation.
This is fine as long as the dependencies do not result in a never-ending
cycle. The following image shows the chain of events:

|===
|image:images/revalidate.gif[image] |image:images/validate.gif[image]

|_A change happens to Fig 4 that affects its preferred size. It calls
revalidate(), which walks up the parent chain marking figures as invalid
until a "root" is reached which is reported to the update manager._
|_The update manager validates the invalid branches. Layout happens
top-down. Note the Fig 5 was not invalid, but if Fig 2 changes its size
as a result of laying out, the Fig 5 will mark itself as invalid and get
validated as part of the same pass._
|===

In the above example, Fig 5 may have its size changed when Fig 2
performs its layout.

=== Top-Down Layout

Normally figures layout in a top-down fashion. This means that figure
has its bounds set before it lays out its children. Also, after it
places its children, it then calls validate() on them in case their size
changed, making them invalid. This is the same way that Composites work
in SWT.

=== Special-Purpose Layout Techniques

In some cases, the top-down process is modified. A common example is
figures whose bounds must wrap around the bounds of their children.
link:connections.html[Connections]

The other special layout case is found in the text package. Text figures
must layout in two steps. First, they contribute fragments into
paragraphs or blocks. These fragments may get reordered for
bidirectional text. Also, their baselines and the overall alignment of
each line may also be adjusted. The end of a line or block may only
occur after a figure has finished its layout. So, the second layout pass
is simply a finalization step in which the figures are told to now
update their bounds based on their final fragment locations.
Understanding this layout is no necessary for using the text package,
but it does help in appreciating some of the problems solved by Draw2d's
approach to layouts and coordinate systems.
